The Project Gutenberg eBook of On Board the "Rocket", by Robert C.
(Chamblet) Adams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: On Board the "Rocket"

Author: Robert C. (Chamblet) Adams

Release Date: December 29, 2020 [eBook #64171]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Image source(s): https://archive.org/details/onboardrocket00adamrich

Produced by: Richard Hulse, Graeme Mackreth and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON BOARD THE "ROCKET" ***


[Illustration: THE ROCKET.]




  ON BOARD THE "ROCKET."


  BY
  ROBERT C. ADAMS.


  "----Ships are but boards, sailors but men: there be land-rats
  and water-rats, water-thieves and land-thieves."

  --_Merchant of Venice._


  BOSTON:
  D. LOTHROP      COMPANY,
  FRANKLIN ST., CORNER OF HAWLEY.




  COPYRIGHT BY
  Robert C. Adams,
  1879.




PREFACE.


All the incidents of this book are facts, occurring in the writer's
own experience. In a few cases names have been altered, in accordance
with his desire, neither to give offence to the living, nor to cast
discredit upon the dead. He makes no apology for its imperfections;
for he issues it, not as a contribution to literature, but as a needed
exposure of abuses on shipboard, which are too common, but too little
known. He refers with diffidence to his own methods of discipline,
believing that in the principles which prompted them, lie the means of
promoting the interests and good repute of our Merchant Marine.




CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER I.

    The _Rocket_--The Cargo--Shipping the Crew--The
    Start--Rolling--Discomfort--Quiet--Gale--Storm
    Music--Discipline--Northeast
    Trades--Aye! Aye!--Doldrums--Sharks--A
    Shark Story--South-east Trades.


    CHAPTER II.

    A Saucy Sailor--Sailors' Treatment--An Easy Ship--Three
    Kinds of Discipline--A Good Run--Proving the Reckoning--Sea
    birds.


    CHAPTER III.

    The Voyage of the "Dublin"--Capt. Streeter--A Darkey
    Crew--No Profanity--The Mates--A Bully--A Tobacco
    Cargo--Owner's Instructions--A Blower--No Sitting
    Down--Pomposity--Brass Knuckles--Flogging--The Third
    Mate--Reefing Topsails--Mr. Jones--A Smart Officer--The
    Brick-wall Theory--Reflections--Good Advice--Land,
    ho!--Porpoises--Mother Carey's Chickens--Captain and
    Mate--Land In Sight--Overheard--Gibraltar--Information--Where
    Christ was born--In the Mediterranean--Jake--Gulf of
    Lyons--Genoa Bay--Quarantine--Discharging Cargo.


    CHAPTER IV.

    The Voyage of the "Dublin" concluded--_Genova La Superba_--Leave
    of Absence--On Shore in Italy--Loading Marble--Mates'
    Opinions about Driving Sailors Ashore--Women in
    Ships--Anchor at Gibraltar--Through the Straits--Pumps
    Choked--How to Clinch Buntlines--Cleaning the Spittoon--A
    Sleepy Officer's Danger--Holystones--Beating a Boy--Officers'
    Ambition--Eternal Vigilance--Old Jenkings--A
    Breeze Aloft--The Pilot's Rebuff--Blood Tubs--Paying
    Off--Promotion--The Mate and the Owner.


    CHAPTER V.

    John Shephard--My Model Sailor--Christmas--Ode to the
    _Rocket_--Grub--Doubtful Islands--Becalmed off Java--Officers'
    Yarns--Off Java Head--Narrow Escape--A Floating
    Light.


    CHAPTER VI.

    Life in the East Indies--Carimata Passage--Singapore--Three
    Months' Extra Pay.


    CHAPTER VII.

    Penang--Penang Hill--Nearly Wrecked--Deliverance--West
    Coast of Sumatra--Padang--Padang Thieves--Padang
    Church--Malay Ordination--Padang Drives--Natives--Captain
    Blowhard--Insolence.


    CHAPTER VIII.

    Another Voyage in the "Dublin"--Second Mate--Mr. Howard's
    Grievances--Mr. Howard Leaves--Leaking--The New
    Mate--Second Mates' Duties--Ships' Work--Squalls--Old
    Harry--At the Fore-truck--Amsterdam--Dutchmen--The
    Captain's Relapse--Worrying the Second Mate--Dreams--A
    Growl--A Cabin Conference--An Irish Sailor--Two Finnish Sailors.


    CHAPTER IX.

    Another Voyage in the "Dublin" concluded--A North Sea Gale--The
    Lee Shore--In Distress--Good-bye to Old Harry--Captain's
    Yarns--Bullies--Gothenburg--Another Start--Decks Swept--Stopping
    the Leak--Hurrying the Crew--A Hard Life--A Freezing Gale--A
    False Bearing--Weatherwise--Leaving the "Dublin"--Mr. Wright's
    Letter--Capt. Streeter's End.


    CHAPTER X.

    Land Again--The "Flying Dutchman"--A Cape of Good
    Hope Gale--Gales--Rolling Down to St. Helena--Watch
    and Watch--Tarring Down--Sailors' Growls--Sailors'
    Opinions--Discontent in the Cabin--Ills of Sea Life.


    CHAPTER XI.

    Sailors' Resources--The Tar Barrel--A Wild Ship--Boarding
    a Vessel--Ready for Port.


    CHAPTER XII.

    Sailors' Songs--Bully or Coax--Treatment of Sailors--Schooner
    "Jane"--A Mackerel Shower--Fog on the Coast--Taking
    a Pilot--Arrived--Paying off--Scraping Belaying
    Pins.

    "Once more upon the waters, yet once more!
    And the waves bound beneath me, as a steed
    That knows his rider."

    --_Byron's Childe Harold._

 "Who would not sell a farm and go to sea?"--_Sailor Proverb._




ON BOARD THE "ROCKET."




CHAPTER I.


In Lloyds Register is recorded:--"_Rocket_, Bk. 384, 135, 25, 16.5,
1851, Medford, W.O., icf.," which being interpreted means, Bark
_Rocket_, 384 tons, 135 feet long, 25 feet beam, 16-1/2 feet depth of
hold, built in 1851, at Medford, of white oak, with iron and copper
fastenings. To which may be added, that she was a well known trader
to the East Indies, being called in those ports "the green bark," on
account of being painted a dark green, or what the painters style tea
color. She was a good looking vessel, neatly finished about the decks,
and the masts and yards were all scraped bright. The chief peculiarity
was that she was narrow in proportion to her length, being compared by
an old sailor to "a plank set on edge." This caused her to be reputed,
and not undeservedly, a crank vessel, and many a gloomy croaker has
uttered the foreboding that like her sister ship, the "Dauntless," she
would go to sea sometime--never to return. Yet for many years she had
gone and come, and though occasionally threatening to capsize, she had
never really performed this undesirable man≈ìuvre. The builder and the
subsequent owner were two of the most practical merchants of Boston.
She must therefore have been well put together and properly cared for,
as there was truth in the remark made, that "what Nat G----, and Dick
B---- didn't know about a ship wasn't worth knowing."

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Rocket_ was lying at Central Wharf in Boston, loading a cargo
for the East Indies. Barrels of beef, pork, tar and pitch were stowed
in the bottom; then followed in miscellaneous order, lumber, sewing
machines, kerosene oil, flour, biscuits, preserves, ice pitchers,
carriages, oars and many other articles.

As the sailing day drew near, the important matter of choosing officers
and crew had to be considered. The first person who applied was an
aspirant to the mate's berth.

"How long have you been to sea?" was asked.

"Thirty years."

"Why! how old are you?"

"Twenty-nine."

"How do you make that out?"

"Oh, I was born and bred at sea."

He was thought to be too old a sailor for a young captain to manage,
and was not engaged. Soon a young man applied, with more modest
demeanor, and he was secured. The rest of the crew were soon picked
out. Wishing to choose for myself who should sail with me for so many
months, the shipping master was told to send on board any good men
who applied to him, giving the preference to Norwegians and Swedes,
these being, in my opinion, both in seamanship and docility, the best
class of sailors that man our vessels. Germans and Scotchmen he was
told to favor next, then Englishmen, and lastly Irishmen, for these,
though often capital seamen, do not as readily as some others endure
privations without grumbling, and are too strong republicans to be
always submissive subjects of a despotic government such as that of
shipboard. American sailors unfortunately are not often in the choice.
They are soon promoted from the forecastle, if they enter it, or else
after short service find they can do better on shore, than by leading a
dog's life at sea.

One afternoon in September all the crew were mustered on board. Captain
Jack Frost came alongside with his tug boat, and his cheery voice
hailed, "Are you all ready, Cap.? Pass out your lines!" The owner said,
"Good-by," and moving towards his yacht, added, "I'm going to give you
a race down the harbor." The fasts were cast off, the bark was tugged
out into the stream; then with topsails set before a strong nor'wester
she showed the towboat the advisability of getting out of her way. We
should have thought she was sailing fast, had not the yacht "Vesta"
overtaken us, crossed our bow, and boomed away down Broad Sound, under
jib and mainsail. Just inside of Boston light we rounded to and let the
pilot get into the canoe from the station pilot boat; then, filling
away, the course was shaped for Cape Cod and the voyage had begun. The
anchors being secured, the top-gallantsails were loosed, and leaving
all the accompanying fleet astern, away we sped, ten knots an hour, and
in four hours passed the Race Light.

"Why don't you knock him down?" said I.